Have you ever had an important decision
suddenly thrust on you?
You thought you knew the right thing to do.
But as soon as you decide,
you start having second thoughts
—maybe even regrets—
and now you can’t stop thinking,
‘Did I do the right thing?’
This tendency to repeat a thought
over and over again is called rumination.
And when those thoughts make us feel anxious,
it can be bad for our health.
Some of you students
made tough decisions
before you came to this class.
Thank you for that.
And everyone right now is faced
with challenging decisions every day.
So, what can we do
to stop anxious rumination once it starts?
Well, open your Bibles with me to Psalm 37:5,
and notice the advice
that is given to us here:
“Commit your way to Jehovah;
“rely on him,
and he will act in your behalf.”
Now, the word for “commit” here
literally means “to roll, or remove,
something from our life.”
So as the footnote says,
we need to “roll [our] way
[our concerns, our anxieties] upon” Jehovah.
When we ruminate anxiously,
we’re holding on to our problem,
but the Bible says that through prayer,
we have to take the problem off our shoulders
and put it on Jehovah’s.
In other words, we no longer act
as if the burden is ours.
We need to leave it in his hands.
It sounds so simple,
but at times, it’s hard to do.
So, what can help us
when we have trouble letting go?
Well, our suggestion today
is to let Jehovah inspire you with awe.
Now, to inspire someone
means to make them feel
that they want to do something and can do it.
And it may be that Jehovah
gave us the emotion of awe
for that very purpose.
You may be wondering now,
How can awe help me?
Well, open your Bibles again,
this time to Genesis chapter 28.
And let’s look at an example together
that illustrates how this can work.
In verse 10,
we catch up with the patriarch Jacob.
He’s on the road.
Notice it says:
“Jacob departed from Beer-sheba
and kept going toward Haran.”
Why was he going there?
Well, the main reason
was to get away from his brother, Esau.
Why?
Because Jacob had just made a tough decision.
And Esau was mad.
You know the story.
For most of his life,
Esau despised the family birthright,
and that upset Jacob very much.
So at some point,
he purchased the birthright from him.
Years go by, and then one day,
their father, Isaac, is getting ready
to bless Esau as the firstborn.
Can you picture the scene?
What was Jacob going to do?
It’s not possible today
to know all the factors
that influenced Isaac,
Rebekah, and Jacob back then.
But the fact is,
Jacob’s decision
put a strain on the whole family.
Esau began plotting to kill his brother,
and that’s why Jacob was on the road.
Do you think he might have been ruminating
a bit that day on what happened?
Did he perhaps have second thoughts?
Was he asking himself:
‘Did I do the right thing?
‘Was it OK to fool my father?
What does Jehovah think of me now?’
Those would have been reasonable questions.
Of course,
we don’t know what Jacob was thinking.
But if he was having second thoughts,
what happened next
must have helped him
to stop ruminating on them.
Notice what we read in verses 11 and 12:
“In time
“he came to a place
“and prepared to spend
the night there because the sun had set.
“So he took one of the stones of that place
“and set it to rest his head on
and lay down there.
“Then he had a dream, and look!
“there was a stairway set on the earth,
“and its top reached up to the heavens;
“and there were God’s angels ascending
and descending on it.”
Now, this heavenly ladder
may have looked
like a rising flight of stones
like the one you see here
in this illustration.
Jacob could see now
that he was not alone.
He was a small part
of an awesome organization.
And there is communication
between the different parts
of that organization.
Angels minister in some important way
between Jehovah and humans
who have his approval.
And there was more.
Let’s continue in verse 13:
“And look!
“there was Jehovah stationed above it,
and he said:
“‘I am Jehovah the God of Abraham
“‘your father and the God of Isaac.
“‘The land on which you are lying,
“‘to you I am going to give it
and to your offspring.’”
How comforting those words
must have been to Jacob!
Jehovah wasn’t displeased with him.
Quite the contrary.
He promised to bless Jacob
in a marvelous way.
Jehovah apparently used
this awesome experience
to help Jacob to let go
of any anxiety he might have had.
As long as he continued to do his best,
Jacob could trust Jehovah to do the rest.
What a relief!
Notice his reaction in verse 17:
“And he grew fearful and added:
“‘How awe-inspiring this place is!
“‘This can only be the house of God,
and this is the gate of the heavens.’”
Jacob’s relief here is almost palpable.
He is no longer conflicted.
The vision inspires him
to make a vow of loyalty to Jehovah forever.
You can read what he did and said
in the latter part of this chapter.
Now, verse 17
uses the same Hebrew word twice.
The first time it’s translated as “fearful,”
the second time as “awe-inspiring,”
and that may be
because awe is a surprising emotion.
It’s a wonderful mix
of inspiration and fear.
You sense you’re in the presence of someone
or something greater than yourself,
but it makes you feel small in a good way.
Awe can humble you,
and that shifts your thinking.
It helps you to see things as they are
and not as you expect them to be.
It’s the kind of fear Proverbs 1:7 says
“is the beginning of knowledge,” or wisdom,
and that may be why at times
Jehovah evokes awe in us.
Like Jacob,
people often say they feel more centered
and spiritual after an awesome experience.
Awe seems to pull us out of ourselves.
It connects us
on a deeper level with Jehovah,
and it reconnects us
with what is most important
—Jehovah’s sovereignty,
his creation, and his people.
Now, getting away from Esau
did not end Jacob’s problems.
There were other times in his life
when he again became very anxious and afraid,
but true to his word,
Jehovah was always there.
As long as Jacob was faithful,
Jehovah made sure he would succeed.
Twenty years later, when Jacob returned
to Canaan with his family,
Jehovah sent out a company
of angels to greet him.
How awesome was that!
Well, what does all of this mean
then for you and me?
Psalm 89:7 says
that Jehovah is “awe-inspiring
to all [those] around him.”
If you’ve ever hiked in Banff National Park
or walked in Muir Woods
or felt goose bumps as you looked up
into the night sky,
you know what awe feels like.
You’ve experienced
Jehovah inspiring you.
So the next time you need
to get out of your head,
remember awe.
Take a walk in the woods;
sing your favorite Kingdom song.
Awe may be
the most underutilized way we know
to help us to stop ruminating
on anxious thoughts
and fully commit our way to Jehovah.
Don’t let your problems stress you out.
Do your research, pray for guidance,
make the best decision you can,
and then let Jehovah
inspire you with awe.